I'll ask you first of all Warren just give us a little bit about your
background, kind of how you grew up and what might have influenced you to be a
writer and why a science fiction writer.
When I was 11 years old we moved to Texas and at that time I had been writing a
little poetry for a couple years. The first summer we moved to Texas we didn't
know anyone and didn't know any place to go and my father parked me and my
brother at a boys club, Panther Boys Club in Fort Worth, Texas. It was a
blockbuster summer for Texas. They were trying to bust the top out of the
thermometer. There was no air conditioning in the Panther Boys Club. We used to
go down there, a pair of cut-off blue jeans shorts, no shirt, no shoes, no
socks, brown bag lunch and a quarter for a Coke, right? And that was it. The
only cool place in the building was the north side of the building in the
library, which had a cement floor. It was the only cool spot in the building and
I loved to read and went to the library and all along the bottom shelf of the
library was Tom Swift and Tom Swift, Jr. And that summer I read them all, went
back to school in the fall, discovered Space Cadet by Robert Heinlein and I was
hooked. Absolutely hooked. And then science fiction reading formed probably on
the average about 50% of my recreational reading for the rest of my life, to
this stage anyway. I started trying to write stories
that may or may not have been science fiction or horror or occult after about
the seventh grade when a teacher read in two parts at Gran Poe's Cask of
Amontillado. And for years I turned out terribly Poe-esque, grotesque, horror,
gore stories.
Which weren't any good, but which were great fun, which were great fun, were
great fun to turn in in class. You know, you have to write, a teacher would say,
write a page of description and I write this lurid scene of grotesque, you know,
body in the grave, Edgar Allan Poe description. I guess it was great early
training for doing that. I didn't start trying seriously to write science
fiction until about 1977, 1978.
And thought, you know, I've been reading so much of this, I really ought to try
writing some of it. I had written a war novel, which is unpublishable. It's
written in seven different styles. But it was the first novel that I wrote, so I
decided to write this science fiction novel.
And discovered how little I knew about, intuitively, about the storytelling
process. That the writing had always been very easy for me, but how little
intuitively I knew about the storytelling process. And so I forced myself to
finish that terrible book. It has an abbreviated ending. I finally decided that,
you know, the bomb would blow up and they would all disappear because I couldn't
cope with them anymore. But I forced myself to finish it. And then I tried my
hand at some fantasy because I was reading a fair amount of fantasy at the time
and decided that I really like science fiction better. So when I got the
opportunity to quit my full-time job and only have to work part-time and write
for a year, which was a contract my wife and I agreed to. And I said, you know,
I'm going to give it my best shot in science fiction. And this is the genre that
I've loved, so I might as well do everything I can to make it work. And that's
where the Windhover books came from. Okay, I've got to ask.
It's the Windhover books. The hero's name is Gerard Manley. I'm not an English
major, but...
The clues are pretty evident. It is. That's slightly reminiscent of something.
And this was obviously deliberate. Are you interested in Hopkins, the poet?
Yeah, it's my left-handed salute to the old man. I mean, I think he was a poet
who was probably 100 years ahead of his time.
He's not one of those poets that you walk around reciting verses to at people's
parties. But I think he did marvelous. I think he took marvelous chances with
the language and marvelous chances with poetry. And some of it is just, you
know, it's breathtaking. But no one's going to read a tribute to Gerard Manley
Hopkins. So when I sat down to do the story, I had already decided that I was
going to name the ship Windhover, which is his most famous poem, The Windhover.
And it just seemed, you know, the natural thing to do, the name of the character
Gerard Manley, especially since he is interested in poetry, right? And then in
the second book, when Gerard finds himself at the end of his road and thinks
this is going to be it, it's going to be all over, he writes a poem to GM, which
is himself, right? But it's also the poem to Gerard Manley Hopkins. And it
echoes the language of the wind hover, Hopkins, the wind hover. It echoes that
language and asks some of the same questions only from Gerard's point of view
rather than from Hopkins' point of view. So, yeah, it's all very intentional. I
mean, with 54-hour minor in English, it's hard to be unintentional about things
like that. This is kind of, it's a cheap shot. I read that. Viet Cong took
cheaper ones. I enjoyed it. Yeah. What about, you know, all the 15-year-old kids
that read for four hours and toss the book? You know, I guess basically the
question is to what audience do you write or do you write for yourself?
I think, I think it was Raymond Chandler, but I'm, I, I'm not sure who said that
I write first to entertain myself and hope that others are entertained. I had a
certain audience awareness in that when I went back and did the second draft, I
simplified the language somewhat from the original draft because I thought I had
gotten too carried away. But I didn't write it thinking of a specific audience.
Whereas in the, in the book that Ralph and I wrote together, we were, we were
aiming in a sense at an audience that starts with those 12, 13, 14-year-olds. We
wanted to pick up the space opera buffs and then also write things for, you
know, the older audience at the same time, trying to do both things at the same
time. And it was a way of stretching to be able to, to do both, to keep the
language simple and yet to deal with complex ideas and keep the story moving. So
that if you didn't want to deal with the complex ideas, you could just go
through the story. But for those books, I really didn't have an audience in
mind. It was just a story that I had been thinking about for eight or nine
months and I wanted to tell. And I, that seemed more important. And then when I
made the decision about how to tell the story, I knew without deliberating on it
a great deal that I had limited my audience. But I thought, well, I'm willing to
take the chance because I figured I needed something to break into the market.
And I think you have to take chances to do that. It was much appreciated. I
really enjoyed it. I, I, I'm glad that you stuck to your guns. This seems like
as good a place as any to, to ask this question on, on the back of an image of
voices. There's a quote from Ann McCaffrey out in Onaborn's ambitions for four
years. So what was your relationship with Ann McCaffrey and had you corresponded
with her? I was a book salesman for Ballantyne. Ballantyne Del Rey did the
McCaffrey Dragon books, among others. And when she did the first promotion tour
around the country for the hardcover edition of, of White Dragon, I cornered the
Del Rey direct salesman and said, if you don't get her into some of my wholesale
accounts, you know, you're going to, I'm going to break your knees. Besides, I
want to meet her. I mean, there's other reasons besides. So I got her in, I
think, three of the accounts. And then we took her to the airport together. And
her plane was an hour and a half late. So we sat in the, in the bar in the
airport drinking Coors beer, which is one of her favorites. And she can't get
in, in Ireland and listening to Annie tell stories, which is a marvelous
experience in and of itself. So when she came back the following year for the
paperback tour for White Dragon, my wife and I picked her up at the airport,
took her to the hotel in Dallas, which was on fire at the time. So that was all
very exciting. She was extremely tired. It was the 23rd day of a 28 day tour and
night, you know, in 31 cities or something like that. And she was beginning. So
we ended up staying until like one or two o'clock in the morning because she
couldn't sleep and just talking and chatting. And then I took her around all the
next day with a case of Coors beer ice down in the back and about three melons
all diced up because you can't get fresh melon and ironed either. Right. So she
munched on melon and drank Coors beer all day while we toured Dallas and Fort
Worth and visited bookstores and radio stations and developed a grand rapport
and ended up at the airport drinking Coors beer and having a wonderful time. So
we corresponded then, you know. Fairly regularly. Fairly regularly. I say fairly
regularly three or four times a year after that. And after I'd finished the book
and Bannam had bought it, they said, you know, who do you know? And I said,
well, the author I know best is Anne McCaffrey. So I asked her, I said, you
know, would you, would you read it? And she said, yes. And then she said those
wonderful things. And I don't remember anything for about a week after getting
that letter. You know, it's lonely. Yes, yes, yes. It was, it was, the, Annie's
letter was, was as much of a high as the sale.
Right. Right. Yeah. It was as much of a high as the sale was itself. Right.
Right. The, the format that you use in the two books is, it's like a diary. And
then you've got this internal dialogue. How did you develop that approach? Years
of talking to myself. Yes. That, that, that's really it. I mean, I, I know a lot
of writers who talk to themselves, who, when they sit at the typewriter, talk,
carry on conversations and go down the road by themselves in the car and carry
on conversations with themselves, work out problems that way. And I thought,
there's so much of me in Gerard, although there's a great deal of Gerard that
isn't me, there's so much of me in him that it just seemed natural given what
had happened to him to let him do this same thing, except to make it a little
more formal and have him address himself as self. Part of that is, part of how
that happened to him is explained in the third book. What brought him to that
point where he really began to talk to himself? That's how he got that quote
unquote self-reliance, right, is explained in the third book because of what
happened to him in the missing 10 years, right? Can't give away the plot now.
Okay. Because the next question, I had the quote from page 200 in this one. I
don't know exactly when I started talking to self in the second person, but by
the time I ascended from puberty, the habit was firmly set and accepted. I was
going to ask you if that was autobiographical. Yeah, probably, probably.
I would catch myself doing it, sometimes aloud and sometimes just to myself, to
the point where I no longer thought about it, right? Only usually instead of
saying self, although I say self now, which I didn't used to do. Having written
the book, now I say self, right? I don't know. It's life imitating art, but it's
usually Norwood, you dummy. It's Norwood this and Norwood that, and that's how I
do, but I carry on the same kinds of conversation that Gerard did, although I
don't ask Norwood to do the same kinds of things that he asked self to do.
I kind of know the answer to this, but we'll get it on tape anyway. The two
books have a lot of poetry, so apparently you write poetry yourself. And I was
going to ask you if maybe, since it's difficult to sell poetry or to publish it
in a lot of places, maybe this kind of lets you publish some of your books. Oh
yes, yes. One of the modus operandi in the very beginning was to bootleg the
poetry into the story. In fact, it was the Tenderfoot cycle of poems which
helped me formulate how I wanted to put the story together. And all the
Tenderfoot poems aren't in there, fortunately.
But that was part of what I wanted to do in the books, because I thought, again,
that was something else that was, I was taking enough chances, I thought, I'll
take one more. I'll go ahead and try this and see what happens.
I've been writing poetry since I was nine, so I obviously believe in it in some
form or another. So I thought, why not do that and see if we can make it work?
And I was very fortunate and found an editor who believed in it, after having
talked to several others who did not believe in it at all. They won't go for
this wussy stuff. No, no, no. In fact, Judy Lynn Del Rey, who I had known
because I worked for Ballantyne, had read the book. She was the first one to
read the manuscript. And she wrote me this long, two-page detailed letter about
why she hated the book.
And it didn't affect the way I felt about Judy Lynn, but she said, you know, you
really ought to just put this in the bottom drawer and write another one. Well,
of course, I couldn't do that. But what I did was, eventually, I took Judy
Lynn's letter back out of the drawer and read it and re-read it and re-read it.
And then, in the query letters, trying to get people to read the manuscript,
took all those things that she hated and wrote them as if they were a list of
positive attributes for the book. And so, in effect, Judy Lynn helped me sell
the book, right? She taught me, you know, she gave me the information I needed
on how to sell the book. So I took that whole list of things that she didn't
like, said, this is what it is and this is great. And that's what got Karen
Hossett Bantam to read it. And she liked all those things that Judy Lynn did. So
it worked. So I have to thank Judy Lynn Del Rey for helping me sell that book.
Great. We talked to Ardeth Mayher last night and she said that she wrote poetry
for many years. She feels very strongly that having written poetry really helped
her prose writing because of the economy of words and that sort of thing. Do
you, has that helped you with your prose? Do you think that experience of
writing poetry? I think so because if you write poetry regularly and try
constantly to improve it and you're constantly working with the language, you're
constantly trying to squeeze from the language as much meaning as possible. So
it makes you extremely cognizant of words and their meanings and their
subtleties and shades of meanings. I think that it can, that writing poetry can
also hurt your prose. I think that you can, in fact, get too poetic. You're
trying to put too much in. You're trying to make your prose too poetic. I think
it's, I marvel at some of the stuff that Gene Wolfe writes. I mean, I think some
of his, some of his prose just blows me away. But at the same time, I think that
sometimes he, he sticks with a level of writing that is almost too poetic for
the part of the story he's trying to tell that instead of doing it in rhythms,
he's so caught up in that rhythm, so caught up in that level, that poetic level
that he can't bring it down to a faster, cleaner action scene where you, you get
out of that and you sweep the reader along and then pull them back up to another
poetic height. And so I think, you know, I'm, this is not to criticize Gene
Wolfe, but it's to say that I think that because he is a poet and because he is
so poetically involved with the language that it has, it has detracted a little
bit from what he might have otherwise done with the story. Of course, all this
is envy on my part, because if I could, if I could write prose like Gene Wolfe
writes, I, you know, I would, I would be a very happy man. I was reading the,
the books, especially An Image of Voices, because Gerard's role changed quite a
bit in the second book, but it was, it was reminiscent, the situation was
reminiscent of Retief, Laumer's Retief. Mm-hmm. You read the Retief. Years ago,
yes. Years ago. And I tried not, I tried not to make Gerard not like Retief,
right? While still, you know, maintaining that, you know, intergalactic diplomat
role. I tried to make him a very different kind of diplomat. But, but there were
times, in fact, in the first draft, there are sections where it got a little
Retief-like kind of unconsciously, and then I had to go back and say, gee, I
think I read this somewhere before, and I didn't write it. And then you have to
go back and clean things up. Pete, there were, they weren't characters, but the
computers were a pretty big element in the book, which I think is real. I think
the computers are going to be that important in the future. But you seemed at
home with computers and the jargon and that sort of thing. So are you a computer
freak? The interesting part of that is that when I wrote those books, all my
knowledge of computers came from books, right? I had no real firsthand
experience with computers. It was all from books and a lot of reading about them
and what they could do and what they couldn't do, what the latest developments
were. So having a year after I finished the third book, I now have my own home
computer and I do my word processing and all that. And I think I would have a
more difficult time now pulling it off the same way because I know too many
specifics that I didn't know before, right? In a sense, I was safer with the
generalities and approaching it that way. And I was safe from the language and
syntax of talking about computers. And I've had several, one of the most
pleasing things is reactions is I've had several computer programmers and
program analysts tell me that they really enjoyed the computer part, right?
Which means that I did my job as a writer. I got through that part of it and yet
I didn't slow everybody down with the technical ease. So I made it believable
for the people who knew and understood. And I also made it acceptable to the
people who didn't and aren't comfortable with that. Are there any modern day
precedents for the linguistic analysis by computers and the poetry analysis by
computers?
Very crude ones at this stage of the game. But there's been work that's been
done on that. Several universities have done experimental programming with
programming computers to write poetry, programming computers to translate
poetry. And it's all at a very crude level. So my extrapolation of that is a big
stretch. But I thought given the progress of technology that in 7,000 years it
seemed reasonable that we'd figure out how to do it. Might just do that. Okay.
And whenever Manley was in the Fed Center rehab, he teaches a little class in
writing. And the reason was that it was to help the guests put some of their
thoughts and feelings down on paper for therapy. Is writing kind of therapeutic
to you? Yeah. It's a form of therapy. It's a form of catharsis. It's a way of
exercising your own demons. You get to take this demon and give it to someone
else and make them deal with it. And then you get it out of your own head and
you don't have to worry about it. And then if it gets loose with them and runs
over them, that's okay because it's them. It's not you. And so, yeah, it's
always been that way for me. Poetry was that way especially because it's an
extremely emotional form when you're young. And so it allows you a place to let
go of those emotions where otherwise you might not have a socially acceptable
outlet. So it's always been that for me. Has there ever been any precedent for
psychologists using writing for people that have been through bad situations to
exercise their demons? Oh, yes. Yes, yes. In fact, I participated in a course
that was partially based on that idea at the Federal Correctional Institute in
Fort Worth where we got all these minimum security prisoners to work out some of
their demons in creative writing. And the whole thing on Pleasance when Gerard
is in the rehab center is based on some things that we did when I was down at
Fort Hood where they had a little program for long-term rehabilitation patients
in the hospital at Fort Hood where they were doing some of that. And I got to
participate in a little bit of that program. And that's where the idea came
from.
Okay. Okay. Flexing the Warp Delta. I guess I should, is it Sheree? I call her
Shereel. That's it. That's it. Okay, good. I realize that that's the first time
I'd ever pronounced that word aloud. Flexing the Warp dealt a great deal with
Shereel's pregnancy. And I've been through two pregnancies. And it was very
real. And most science fiction books, I mean, you either use the auto-wool or
something or it's no big deal. But there was a lot of human emotion and love and
that sort of thing. And I hadn't seen it before. Have you been through a
firsthand pregnancy? I mean, it's very realistically. Yes. Yes. Yes. Through the
pregnancy and through a miscarriage before it. So that I took all that. And, you
know, you write what you know. And so I put that in there because those were
very important times of my life when they happened. And I was there when my
daughter was born in the delivery room. And that's why we got, you know, we got
to have the big group scene when Serena is born. And I thought, you know,
everybody ought to get to share this experience because it was really a lot of
fun. And one of those, again, one of those gratifying things is to have a fan
come up and say, you know, gee, I really like, you know, female fans especially.
You know, you really got that down. I really understand that. And our husbands
come up and say, my wife was like that when she was pregnant. I mean, Gerard
makes a wonderful comment in there that, you know, maybe women change species
when they're pregnant. There's some biological basis for that. I read that a lot
to my wife. My secretary, in fact, she looks to me for what could she read in
science fiction because she's not well-versed. So I recommended these and told
her it was really a love story, especially the same one. And she was just amazed
that science fiction could be a love story. Oh, really? And she's going to read
it. So I'm anxious to see her reaction to it. Okay. I have a comment. So I'm
going to, I'm going to, I say the series is a people story. It's not a hardware
story. You don't, you don't explain your warps, the ghosts, how, why there's so
many cross fertile bipeds around this. They're just there. And we just accept
that. And then I have parenthetically my applause. Do you consider, okay, did
you ever think about explaining these things or just decide, hey, I'm going to
make this a science fiction book. And we're not going to explain all this shit,
how the, how we do this and that. People know it's a science fiction book. So,
yeah, I did what a great number of science fiction writers do. And that is I, I
built on what had gone before. And there was, there's, there's such a huge basis
now of groundwork that has been done for us that we don't have to spend a lot of
time explaining how this works and how that works. And, you know, oh, actually
this warp takes us through techie on space, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah, right. We can just use keywords and key concepts. And the
reader has already been grounded in that. And then you can spend more time
telling the story instead of having more time, spend more time explaining all
the, all the mechanical functions. There's a hard science, there's a big hard
science story that I really want to write, but I don't think I have the skills
yet as a writer to do it. So I'm saving that one for when I'm, when I'm better
trained in my craft. Okay. Manly also dreams a lot. Of course, a lot of them may
be flashbacks and things, but, but there are dreams and he replays the dream
that wouldn't it be nice to be able to do that, to keep replaying it and
focusing on the details. And he interprets them. Do you dream a lot? Does this,
does this happen to you? I dreamed a great deal from the time I, well, from
somewhere in the middle of Vietnam until about six, seven years afterward. And I
think that's the major influence on Gerard's dreams. And they were very vivid
and they were very recallable in the same way that he recalls them where I
could, I could, they would start as fragments when I woke up and then I could, I
could pull them back. I could bring more pieces back into the dream. That kind
of faded off after about six, seven years after I got back from Vietnam. And I
don't do nearly as much of it, but that's where it came from. That, that process
came from. And then in Gerard's case, it's, it's, it's part of what he suspects
and it's, it's, he's getting a mirror image of what was a prescient talent and
his prescience is in effect kind of turned around and giving him a way to look
back into his past. Warped by the mind wipers. Anton.
taşer.
Okay. she looks just she has little stars and a little skirt and all that but
that looks like it might have been added so what you know i i like i like
larkin's interpretation of shereel better than i do his interpretation of gerard
i mean gerard just what little description you get he's getting a little pot
belly and he's getting a little bald and he doesn't look like captain space
cadet but when they showed me the original cover which did not have a little red
tank top i said from my five years experience in book wholesaling you're going
to have a problem selling this book because book wholesalers are on the whole
more conservative in their buying habits than bookstores and they said oh no no
no don't worry about it and i said you're going to have a problem they said
don't worry about we won't hear it's too late to change it when one of the
largest wholesalers in the country who had sold about 3 500 copies of the first
book refused to order the second book they literally stopped the presses while
the book was printed they hadn't found it yet but they had printed 90 000 covers
they trashed 90 000 covers pulled the artwork put on this little red acetate
tank top reshot the cover and reprinted it and then in order to go out and sell
it to these people who had refused to buy it originally they shot xeroxes of it
and the red acetate turns black on the xerox of course so it looks like she's
all covered up so everybody bought the book then and then they when it came in
and they and they put it out suddenly people started looking at you can see
through that top so it's a rather bizarre story but the things that happen on
covers are bizarre right the cover of the third book has nothing to do with the
story uh and the woman looks just like very i mean looks just like sherelle
except it's supposed to be fairy peg and here's the grand high muckety muck of
ribble galaxy you know the number one titular head of the whole place who never
gets naked except when she gets in the bathtub right standing there on a
loincloth on a halter top right just three no two no she only has two yeah she
only has two yeah yeah i've got it here okay well let's look at our radio yeah
yeah we'll show that we'll hold this up to the microphone so all the whole radio
audience can see what it looks like but it looks almost like uh teresa in the
face
wow okay did any did any cover would there accidentally be a dozen or so copies
without the little acetate tank top that got out no there were some copies of
the cover right i have i think i have three or four copies of the cover without
the tank top hang on to those yeah but the best part was they the bookstore at
the university of texas at arlington asked them for a blow up of the cover to do
a big window display because i used to work there and they give me a big
promotion for each book and when they did the blow up they did the original
artwork without the tank top and when the manager of the store saw it he said we
can't put that in the window right i mean this thing's like 24 by 36 he said we
can't put this in the window so they took it back to the to the to the art
department and then cut out a little red acetate blouse and they and just kind
of slapped it on there and stuck it in the window so i have i have a blow up of
the original okay
you do you work part-time now is that for bantam i know i used i did until
february i worked part-time for bantam was it any coincidence that you worked
for bantam and bantam published your novels no no uh it it might have helped in
in in getting it read because when i wrote to karen haas at bantam i noted i
told her that i was working part-time for bantam so it probably didn't hurt in
getting it read but she wouldn't have bought it if it yeah just because i worked
for bantam uh it was nice working for bantam when the books came out though
because you helped get distribute your own book and i was putting books at the
dallas fort worth airport so my book got on the bestseller rack and you know
it's you know it's good you know it was it was great in terms of sales of the
book i mean we sold an enormous number of books at the dfw airport because we
put them all out there in mass numbers on the rack which sells x number of books
anyway and then i autographed every one of those crazy things and put little
tags on there to tell people that they were autographed he was telling me that
he was through the airport and saw the autographed book because i wondered what
how that had happened um there's another there's an interesting um i guess it's
a marketing ploy in these books i had not seen before maybe it's just because i
haven't seen that many varieties of books but where you have excerpts from the
next book in there did you did you have a hand in there no no that's bantam well
bantam has been doing it for for some number of years uh they will do excerpts
from one book uh like one western in another western sometimes they will do one
particular mainstream novel that they're pushing hard that's going to be a lead
title they'll do in books for two or three months preceding they'll put a little
excerpt in the back um i don't know i i can't think off the top of my head of
any other series where they've done that same kind of thing but they just said
we're going to do it and i said that's fine the only my only objection is that
that those are never it's they're never corrected and it's never the corrected
manuscript that they use so it's full of typos and all kinds of crazy things and
they just stick it in the back it is at least on the first one was called the
win hover trilogy and as george said it's i think i don't think they ever did i
think they always called it a series okay yeah i called it a trilogy fool that i
was i called it a trilogy because that's how i thought about it but they always
called it a series why did you decide to go on with another one it's just
necessary for convention or is it anne mcafree it's anne mcafree's fault i don't
blame it on any she wrote after she she has read all the books in manuscript now
when after she finished the third book she wrote me this long long letter asking
me this whole list of questions she said you have answered all the main
questions in the story i'm not objecting to that but i want to know this and i
want to know that i want to know this and i want to that and are you ever going
to talk about this and you're going to talk about that and she said either write
me a long letter back or write another book so i laughingly shared that letter
with my editor and started thinking about the answers to those questions but it
hadn't gotten beyond that point until the first book started to sell really well
and then my editor said gee you ought to think about the fourth book and i said
well the only way i'll do a fourth book if it's the final book because i don't
want an endless series right if i can make this the final book and under these
conditions then i will i will write it and i will answer annie's question so the
fourth book is going to be to answer any questions i mean that's what started
the whole thing and dan mcafree's fault bless her heart you have uh you
apparently have other things going on now other science fiction i assume science
fiction works um would you want to share any of that with us what you're working
on yeah i finished uh a book in october with uh a man who's been my best friend
since we were 12 years old ralph milas called the sarin cynicals which has
nothing to do with the series it has to do with ralph spending three years in
the desert in saudi arabia and baking his brain and coming back and thinking he
wanted to write science fiction after 20 years as being a successful accountant
and i'll have better sense than that in understanding the financial side of this
world we wrote that in what took most of last year to write that i just finished
the fourth book in the series uh finished the next to the last draft right
before i came here to ag econ uh and i have a proposal in front of bantam now
for a new series called the double spiral war which is going to involve a lot of
my experiences in vietnam but also a lot of my reading on wars in general
it's really a kind of it's a 485 000 story about a war but it breaks neatly into
five sections uh because of the scope of the war and it's a viewpoint on war
that i that i wanted to use in telling a story about a war that i really haven't
seen done the way i wanted it to do and why what the way i wanted it done so i'm
that's probably going to be my next project is it going to be closer to uh river
war or build the galactic hero or starship troopers or it's going to be
something different well i hope it's going to be something different uh this the
first the first chapter in the first book opens up with the leader of the
opposition who by the end of that chapter has become a very sympathetic
character uh i expect the readers to really like him because he is a very human
uh compassionate individual but because of what happens to him and because
personally and politically i mean he ends up being the antagonist he's on the
wrong side of the fence but part of what i want to do is to show that you can be
on the wrong side of the fence and be a good guy quote unquote right you can be
a lovable likable human being with all those positive traits we think of in
people and be on the wrong side in the wrong place and end up you know having to
pay for it and so i'm starting that book from uh the viewpoint of of of this
very likable antagonist
okay i'll ask you kind of a general question then you uh distributed books uh
whatever your your job with with valentine with man was what's uh what's the
future going to be like for for the genre of science fiction um next five or ten
years books are getting pretty damn expensive um you don't just go in and save
your pocket chains buy them anymore um is there going to be uh more fewer big
big companies but fewer companies controlling all publishing what what is your
outlook on it all right excuse me i don't know i've been in this in the book
business since 1969 and i've decided that the only constant is change and i've
decided that if a rumor comes along about some change in the industry the more
absurd the rumor the better its chances of coming true it's extremely difficult
industry to predict on a short-term basis it looks to me like for a short term
we are going to have fewer companies fewer markets more
more formula type science fiction less science fiction that that stretches that
reaches out but i think that will change i don't think that's a permanent
condition i think that's part of the temporary flux that the market is in i
think we will see houses like tour get stronger they are very financially stable
they have done well with the books that they've done they will get stronger i
think other smaller companies will in one way or another begin to fill the
vacuum that's been left by all this conglomerate ization and that we will see
again another expansion whether it takes three years or five years i have no way
of knowing but i think we'll see another expansion the thing that scares me is
what you mentioned first and that is the price of the books i figured out when i
was running a retail store about seven eight years ago that you know somewhere
in like 1990 that the average paperback book was going to cost ten dollars and
97 but then the average retail clerk at the same time was going to be making
like 22.50 an hour all right if assuming it's a certain level of inflation uh
the question is will we be able to overcome those same psychological barriers
that we overcame with gasoline and the rising price of bread i mean i can
remember buying bread for 10 cents a loaf and i can remember buying gas for 17
cents a gallon all right now you know we rejoice if we can get gas and then 91
cents 89 cents and everybody rushed to the corner for 89 cents a gallon gasoline
and it'll go back up to a dollar something again if we can overcome that
psychological barrier of 10.97 for a paperback maybe maybe it'll survive but i
don't know that's the part that scares me is the inflation prices as much as
anything else but i think what part of what we'll see is more and more of a
shift over to the trade paperbacks that they will take the place of most of the
hard covers because the hard covers will just get too expensive and people
regardless of the the ratio people will just be unwilling to pay hardcover
prices so we'll see more trade paper we'll see more new books done in trade
paper by lesser known authors that might have been done in hardcover at one time
by doubleday or berkeley or someone else and that may take some of the pressure
off the market so trade paperbacks are here to stay i think so yes i think i
think the thing that will cinch it and and i keep waiting for publishers are not
very progressive people but i keep waiting for the publishers to do and trade
back trade paper publishing what they did years and years ago in mass market
publishing and that is go to a standard size because what will cinch the market
is when they go to a standard trade size the same way they did with the mass
market size that means that all those places out there that you can put those
books will go to a standard size rack which means they can be handled in the
same way which means they can get much deeper into the distribution channels
which means they'll get much wider distribution and better sales right and until
they do that until the publishers finally beat their heads against each other
and are willing to settle on a size they're going to limit the sale ability of
those things but i think they will i think the market will demand that they do
that and when they do then we will see a new class we will have in a sense mass
market trade books they will be bigger they'll be they'll be slightly better
bound uh maybe slightly better paper bigger typefaces anyway easier to read and
they'll come in standard sizes and they'll show up in racks there'll be a rack
of mass market books and a rack of trade books yeah and that's the direction i
think they have to go you remember all the different size mass market books yeah
you know if you're any collector knows right that's uh my complaint as a
collector i know you said in one book that it looks like uh that's that may
trade paperbacks may save the industry but as a collector i hate them but if
they're here they're here i may have to like it but yeah i have i have larry
newvin's uh the uh the magic goes away that and it's damn it's i can barely get
it in my shelf and then i've got some little ones and there's all different
sizes well if you look that even even with the standardization of size on mass
market books if you look at mass market books they are different sizes all right
not widths but heights all right ban even in the bantam line there are different
heights and what they have started to do is they've knocked off like an eighth
or three sixteenths of an inch from what was their standard height because they
figured if they if they knocked off three sixteenths of an inch on each book and
they were doing a printing of 250 000 books that for the same amount of money
they were getting like an extra 5 000 books out of the same roll of paper now
paper has gotten extremely expensive right so if you can get an extra 5 000
books out of that same roll roll of paper right you've saved some money and it's
but it really messes up your shelf when you have a series and they stair step
along the shelf i have two copies of build a galactic hero first edition that
harry signed yesterday and one of them's at least a quarter of an inch if not
more higher i mean they it's the same edition of the same book printing yeah
it's an ace doubles my stuff yeah kind of stair steps like that too that's
interesting jagged peaks any questions mr carson um no no no well maybe one um
you didn't ask any writing questions no not mechanics thereof look just a few
mechanics type questions whenever you uh start to write something like with the
wind hover what came first character with a
problem uh that's that's how most of my stories begin is character with a
problem um i write short stories that are unsaleable because the characters have
problems that are either so bizarre or uh so obscene or something else that even
though the the problem gets resolved by the end of the story that no one's
really interested that's fine because i just write them for fun they're
characters who pop into my head with this particular problem and i let them run
through their that section of their lives until they solve the problem then they
go back in the drawer and i i've gotten them out of my head which was the most
important thing but i start with a character with a problem and very shortly
thereafter i say shortly usually in in terms of two to three weeks for a novel
length work i have a very good idea of how the story ends all right so i have a
beginning and an ending in the middle is just it's like standing i remember as a
kid standing the first time we went through tennessee and standing on one of
those overlooks and looking out across to the mountains on the other side and
there was nothing but fog and mist in the bottom well that's kind of how i feel
when i get ready to start a novel i know where i am and i know where the
mountain is on the other side but what's in the middle there i don't know except
you have to go down and you have to come back up in order to get there and then
that middle resolves itself in a very vague way as i begin the story and i found
the more that i try to put my characters through paces in the middle to do
certain things the less cooperative they become so what i try to do then is is
tap them back in the line when they start pushing the plot too far away i think
i'll never get to the end this way if you guys keep going left edge a little
right and make me happy so i nudge them back to the right a little bit and then
they head back there and then they go way off too far to the right and then you
have to nudge them back to the left it's a strange process especially when they
come alive in the back of your head and they start saying things and doing
things that you didn't expect them to do cheryl's pregnancy is a perfect example
of that i mean she wasn't supposed to get pregnant for another six months in
this story because i had to get them where they were going first right i was
going to have her get pregnant someplace safe oh no she had to get pregnant and
she and gerard had to argue about it and then i was angry at both of them and
then i had to back off and take five pages out of the manuscript say wait a
minute take them back to the beginning of that scene say it's your problem you
work it out i'll write it down you just tell me what's right now and so i let
them argue out the problem and solve their difficulties and it was all fine you
know and i said you know and i learned a valuable lesson keep your cotton
picking hands off their lives when they're doing it themselves when they're
struggling with it themselves when you get your characters going they become
their own little entities oh yes oh yes they when ralph and i did our book one
of the things that happened was he we had we started with a a male protagonist
and then a minor protagonist who was female and she came alive for me about the
same time that he came alive for ralph and so he was right ralph was writing the
first draft and he was putting words in her mouth and then when i was reading it
and getting ready to write the second draft she was in the back of my head
screaming no no no i wouldn't say that i wouldn't i wouldn't react like that so
i'd get on the phone to ralph and i'd say kalissa says that she wouldn't react
like this and he said well we'll work it out tomorrow at our story conference
and we'd sit there for eight hours trying to hash out dialogue between a
character who was alive in his head and a character who was alive in my head and
he had to have enough sense of that to go back then and write first draft
material based on what i had told him about a character who was living in my
head the only thing that saved us was that some character didn't come alive that
way for both of us right who then would have been schizophrenic he'd have been
alive one way in ralph's head and another way in my head and we'd probably had
to you know do something we'd have to divide him into two characters bizarre
bizarre interesting yeah yeah yeah that's something that always ceases to amaze
us we never ceases to always ceases
just the the writing process and not being writers but being extremely
interested in the process and and we've heard time and time again how the
characters just take over and it's just that blows us away i can think of
characters and i can think of stories and that's where it stops